                                                                                  Chapter 12


Security

       Introduction
       The increasing ubiquity of Xilinx® devices makes protecting the intellectual property (IP)
       within them as important as protecting the data processed by the device. As security threats
       have increased, the range of security threats or potential weaknesses that must be
       considered to deploy secure products has grown as well. The Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC
       provides features to help secure applications running on the SoC. These features include
       the following.

       •   Encryption and authentication of configuration files.
       •   Hardened crypto-accelerators for use by the user application.
       •   Secure methods of storing cryptographic keys.
       •   Methods for detecting and responding to tamper events.

       The sections in this chapter describe these features and their use.

       The functionality of the battery-backed RAM (BBRAM) and eFUSE arrays are also described
       in this chapter and complements the Programming BBRAM and eFUSEs Application Note
       (XAPP1319) [Ref 20].

       The hardware provides many features to detect security intrusions. See Developing
       Tamper-Resistant Designs with Zynq UltraScale+ Devices, XAPP1323 [Ref 32]. This document
       provides guidance and practical examples to help protect the user IP and sensitive data
       within a system. This protection (in the form of tamper resistance) needs to be effective
       before, during, and after the device has been securely booted with a software image or
       configured with a programmable logic (PL) bitstream. Sensitive data can include the
       software and configuration data that sets up the functionality of the device logic, critical
       data, or parameters that might be included in the boot image (for example, initial memory
       contents and initial state). It also includes external data that is dynamically brought in and
       out of the device during post-boot normal operation.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                    Send Feedback
                                                                                                  255
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018              www.xilinx.com
                                                                                 Chapter 12: Security




       Device and Data Security
       Configuration Security Unit (CSU) Introduction
       At the center of the device security is the configuration security unit (CSU). The CSU is
       composed of two main blocks as shown in Figure 12-1. On the left is the secure processor
       block (SPB) that contains a triple redundant processor for controlling boot operation. It also
       contains an associated ROM, a small private RAM, the physically unclonable function (PUF),
       and the necessary control/status registers required to support all secure operations. The
       component on the right is the crypto interface block (CIB) and contains the AES-GCM, DMA,
       SHA-3, RSA, and PCAP interfaces.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                    Send Feedback
                                                                                                  256
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018              www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                                                Chapter 12: Security


                               Runtime access to the CSU can be controlled via the Xilinx peripheral protection unit
                               (XPPU). The CSU has a number of responsibilities, including the following.

                               •    Secure boot.
                               •    Tamper monitoring and response.
                               •    Secure key storage and management.
                               •    Cryptographic hardware acceleration.
X-Ref Target - Figure 12-1




                                                               To/From LPD Main Switch




                                                                  CSU PMU Switch




                                                                                                       CSU DMA
                                                                  CSU
       Tamper                                                                  CSU
                                   INTC                          Local
       Sources                                                               Registers
                                                                Registers
                                          CSU Triple
                                          Redundant
                                          MicroBlaze                                                   Secure Stream Switch
                                                                              RSA
                                                                  PUF
                                                                             Multiplier
                                    ECC

                                                                                                                    AES-
                                                                                                        SHA-3                           To PL
                                                                                                                    GCM       PCAP
                                                CSU ROM                                                  384                            Configuration
                                                                                                                    256
                                                Validation



                                                                                                                   Key
                                                                                                                Management
                                    RAM            ROM                                    PMU ROM
                                   (32 KB)       (128 KB)                                                    BBRAM
                                                                                          Validation         eFUSE
                                                                                                             PUF
                                                                                                             Operation
                                                                                                             KUP
                                                                                                             Family

                             Security Processor Block                                                         Crypto Interface Block

                                                                                                                                              X15318-052418



                                                       Figure 12-1:     Configuration Security Unit Block Diagram




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                                                   Send Feedback
                                                                                                                                                    257
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                                                  www.xilinx.com
                                                                                 Chapter 12: Security


       Secure Processor Block
       The triple-redundant CSU processor provides a highly reliable and robust processing unit
       for secure boot. The 128 KB CSU ROM is used to store the secure immutable ROM code
       program. The ROM code passes an integrity check using the SHA-3 prior to being executed.
       The 32 KB CSU RAM is used as a local secure data storage, and also includes ECC.

       The features of the secure processor block are listed here.

       •   Triple redundant MicroBlaze.

           °   Not user accessible.

           °   Operates through first error and halts on second error.
       •   Internal, uninterruptible clock source.
       •   Dedicated internal RAM protected by ECC.
       •   Dedicated internal boot ROM protected by SHA-3 integrity check.
       •   PUF for generation of a device-unique encryption key.

       Crypto Interface Block
       The features of the CIB include the following.

       •   Secure stream switch for managing data exchange with cryptographic cores.
       •   SHA-3/384 hardened core.
       •   AES-GCM-256 hardened core.
       •   RSA exponential multiplier accelerator hardened core.
       •   Secure key management including BBRAM and eFUSE key storage.
       •   Processor configuration access port (PCAP).

       In secure configurations, the RSA and SHA-3/384 is used to authenticate the image and the
       AES-GCM is used to decrypt the image. During boot, the CIB and SPB run on the internal
       clock oscillator. After boot, the CIB clock can be sourced from a faster PLL clock to increase
       the performance of the user-accessible crypto blocks.

       Data is moved into and out from the CIB using a direct memory access controller
       (CSU_DMA) and the secure stream switch (SSS). The Secure Stream Switch in Chapter 11
       outlines the options for data movement. See Secure Stream Switch and CSU DMA in
       Chapter 11, Boot and Configuration for more information on DMA between cryptographic
       accelerators and memory. The CIB also contains key vaults and key management
       functionality for keys used during boot, as well as post boot for cryptographic acceleration.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                    Send Feedback
                                                                                                  258
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018               www.xilinx.com
                                                                                          Chapter 12: Security


       Access to the PL is provided via the PCAP interface. See PL Configuration in Chapter 11 for
       more information. Table 11-11 lists CSU registers for performing cryptographic functions,
       as well as other CSU security critical functionality.

       CSU Resets
       The different secure blocks of the CSU are reset by writing to the registers in Table 12-1.
       Write 1 to assert reset, write 0 to deassert reset.

       Table 12-1:       CSU Reset Registers
                   Component          Reset Register Name
           AES-GCM                   aes_reset
           PCAP                      pcap_reset
           SHA-3/384                 sha_reset


       Tamper Monitoring and Response
       The primary function of the CSU SPB post-boot is to monitor the system for a tamper event.
       Table 12-2 lists the twelve different monitoring functions that can be configured.

       •     The PS system monitor (SYSMON unit) triggering limits for voltage and temperature
             alarms are user defined and configured.

             °     The csu_tamper_4 and csu_tamper_5 registers generate an over and under
                   temperature alarm when the PS SYSMON unit “threshold mode” is set to 1.
       •     The PL SEU alarm is a runtime health check of the programmable logic.
       •     Activity on the external PSJTAG interface pins can be detected from within the device
             and reported on the JTAG toggle detect alarm.
       •     The CSU can act as a centralized tamper monitor and response hub for a system.
       •     Single external tamper detect signal through MIO.

       The csu_tamper_x registers are write to clear (WTC) so that once a tamper is detected, the
       tamper alarm can be cleared by writing to the corresponding register.

       Table 12-2:       Tamper and Control Registers Channels
                   Register                                        Event Source
             csu_tamper_12        PS SYSMON voltage alarm for PS GTR (VTT and VCC are both monitored).
             csu_tamper_11        PS SYSMON voltage alarm for PSIO bank 3.
             csu_tamper_10        PS SYSMON voltage alarm for PSIO bank 0/1/2 (all three banks).
                 csu_tamper_9     PS SYSMON voltage alarm for VCC_PSINTFP_DDR.
                 csu_tamper_8     PS SYSMON voltage alarm for VCC_PSAUX.
                 csu_tamper_7     PS SYSMON voltage alarm for VCC_PSINTFP.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                            Send Feedback
                                                                                                          259
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                      www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                   Chapter 12: Security


       Table 12-2:    Tamper and Control Registers Channels (Cont’d)
                Register                                              Event Source
            csu_tamper_6          PS SYSMON voltage alarm for VCC_PSINTLP.
            csu_tamper_5          PS SYSMON upper and lower temperature alarms for FPD.
            csu_tamper_4          PS SYSMON upper and lower temperature alarms for LPD.
            csu_tamper_3          PL single event upset (SEU) error.
            csu_tamper_2          JTAG toggle detect. (1)
            csu_tamper_1          Input signal via MIO pin.(2)
            csu_tamper_0          CSU register.

       Notes:
       1. The tamper event is caused by clocking the TDI or TMS input signals on the dedicated JTAG pins. The PJTAG
          interface signals on the MIO are not monitored. Xilinx recommends programming this alarm to generate a system
          interrupt and allow user software to determine the response.
       2. Assert the MIO tamper input (tamper 1) High until the Tamper Response occurs as configured by the
          csu_tamper_1 register (Table 12-4). If the system is reset using the PS_RESET_B, then de-assert the MIO tamper
          signal before releasing PS_RESET_B.

       The external tamper detect signals on MIO are listed in Table 12-3.

       Table 12-3:    External Tamper Detect Signal on MIO

            CSU Signal                            MIO Pins                         I/O        Default Input Value to
                                                                                                   Controller
            ext_tamper          18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,31,32,33                  I                     0

       After a tamper event occurs, how the CSU responds is user configurable. Table 12-4
       indicates which bit in the tamper response registers to set to obtain a specific tamper
       response for each tamper event. Multiple tamper response bits can be set for each tamper
       event. When more than one response bit [3:0] is set, the highest MSB that is set determines
       the tamper response. If bit [4] and one of the bits [3:0] are set, the BBRAM key is erased and
       the CSU generates the response associated with the MSB. For example, if bits 1, 2, and 4 are
       set, the BBRAM key is erased and lockdown occurs (no reset).

       Table 12-4:    Tamper Monitor and Response Bits
          Bit [4:0]                                                 Response
            1 xxxx         Erase the BBRAM key and the response based on the MSB of bits [3:0], if any are set.(1)
            x 1xxx         Secure lockdown and 3-states all I/O pins including MIO, PS dedicated, and PL.(2)
            x 01xx         Secure lockdown.
            x 001x         System reset.
            x 0001         System interrupt (GIC IRQ# 117).

       Notes:
       1. For example, if bit 4, 3, and 2 are all set, the tamper event erases the BBRAM, generates a secure lockdown, and
          3-states on all I/Os.
       2. The CSU hardware 3-states the PL I/Os and the CSU ROM code writes 1s to the MIO_MST_TRI {0:2} registers.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                     Send Feedback
                                                                                                                       260
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                       www.xilinx.com
                                                                                  Chapter 12: Security


       The registers are readable but can only be set on write accesses. Specifically, once a specific
       tamper response is selected for a given tamper event, the bit selecting that response cannot
       be cleared except by a POR. This prevents incorrect or rogue software from accidentally
       decreasing the tamper response penalty. Tamper responses can only be added.

       Emulating a Tamper Event
       During system design and test, a tamper event can be emulated to ensure the system is
       functioning correctly. The csu_tamper_trig register, combined with the csu_tamper_0
       register, provides a mechanism for testing tamper responses. An example of emulating a
       tamper response is as follows.

       1. Write to the csu_tamper_trig register.
       2. The associated tamper response in csu_tamper_0 is executed.
       3. The csu_tamper_trig register self-clears.

       Staged Response to a Tamper Event
       Systems might require multiple responses to a tamper event. The csu_tamper_trig register,
       combined with the csu_tamper_0 register, provides a way to have a two-staged response to
       a tamper event. An example of building a staged response is as follows.

       1. Set bit 0 in csu_tamper_6 (i.e., generate an IRQ when VCCINT_LPD is out of range).
       2. Set bit 2 in csu_tamper_0 (i.e., enter secure lockdown).
       3. Tamper event occurs. VCCINT_LPD goes out of range.
       4. The csu_tamper_6 causes an IRQ to be set.
       5. User software responds to IRQ and clears the tamper.
       6. User software performs some additional action, such as logging or zeroing of
          configuration or data.
       7. User software writes to csu_tamper_trig register.
       8. Csu_tamper_0 response is executed. The device goes into secure lockdown.

       The tamper events can be securely and permanently logged for later analysis. Logging can
       be done within the device through a user eFUSE.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                    Send Feedback
                                                                                                   261
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018               www.xilinx.com
                                                                                               Chapter 12: Security


        Key Management
        The AES crypto engine has access to a diverse set of key sources. Non-volatile key sources
        include eFUSEs, BBRAM, a PUF key encryption key (KEK), and a family key. These keys
        maintain their values even when the device is powered-down. Volatile key sources include
        an OP key and a key update register key

        The device key source selection is exclusively done by the CSU ROM based on the
        authenticated boot image header. A device key can be from any of the following sources
        (see Figure 12-2).

        •     BBRAM
        •     Boot
        •     eFUSE
        •     Family
        •     Operation
        •     PUF KEK

Table 12-5:    Types of Keys
      Key Name                                                   Description
        BBRAM             The BBRAM key is stored in plain text form in a 256-bit RAM array.
            Boot          The boot key register holds the decrypted key while the key is in use.
                          The eFUSE key is stored in eFUSEs. It can be either plain text, obfuscated (i.e., encrypted
        eFUSE
                          with the family key), or encrypted with the PUF KEK.
                          The family key is a constant AES key value hard-coded into the devices. The same key is
                          used across all devices in the Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC family. This key is only used by
                          the CSU ROM to decrypt an obfuscated key. The decrypted obfuscated key is used to
        Family            decrypt the boot images. The obfuscated key can be stored in either eFUSE or the
                          authenticated boot header. Because the family key is the same across all devices, the
                          term obfuscated is used rather than encrypted to reflect the relative strength of the
                          security mechanism.
                          The OP key is obtained by decrypting the secure header using a plain text key obtained
                          from the other device key sources. For secure boot, this key is optional. The OP key is
      Operational
                          specified in the boot header and minimizes the use of the device key, thus limiting its
                          exposure.
       PUF KEK            The PUF KEK is a key-encryption key that is generated by the PUF.
                          User provided key source. After boot, a user selected key can be used with the hardened
  Key update register
                          AES accelerator.

        In addition to the BBRAM and eFUSE key storage locations, the Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC
        also allows for the device key to be stored externally in the boot flash. This key can be
        stored in its obfuscated form (i.e., encrypted with the family key) or in its black form (i.e.,
        encrypted with the PUF KEK).




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                 Send Feedback
                                                                                                                  262
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                      www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                              Chapter 12: Security


       A device key (a key used to boot the device) is selected by the CSU ROM based on the
       authenticated boot header. To use the device key post boot, the following conditions must
       be met.

       •                   The device key is available post boot if the initial configuration files are encrypted or if
                           the authentication only option is selected. See Hardware Root of Trust Only Boot
                           (Auth_Only Option) for more information.
       •                   The device key used during boot must be the device key used post boot. The key
                           source cannot be changed until the next POR.

       Using only the device key post boot is not restricted. A user key can also be loaded into the
       key update register (KUP). The aes_key_src register can be used to select between the
       device key and the key update key. Figure 12-2 shows the key selection process and the
       protections in place.
       X-Ref Target - Figure 12-2




                                                  ROM
                                                Controlled                                 AES Key Source
                                                               CSU          CSU
                                                                                              Register
                                                             ROM Valid   Secure Boot
                                                                                             Selectable
                                    BBRAM

                                      Boot
                                                              Lock A         Lock B
                                     eFUSE

                                     Family
                                                                                                               AES-GCM

                                    Operation
                                                                                       Key
                                      PUF                                             Update

                                      Device Key
                                                                                                                    X15319-031617


                                                              Figure 12-2:   Key Selection

       Battery-Backed RAM
       The BBRAM module is one of the available options for storing the device AES key. The
       BBRAM is a static RAM array. When the device has power on the PS_VCCAUX supply, the
       BBRAM is powered by the PS_VCCAUX supply. When the PS_VCCAUX supply is switched off,
       the device automatically switches the BBRAM power over to PS_VCCBATT. The key stored in
       BBRAM can only be stored in its unencrypted form (i.e., red). It cannot be obfuscated (gray)
       or encrypted (black). The BBRAM can also be cleared, which is valuable as a tamper
       response.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                                 Send Feedback
                                                                                                                                    263
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                                     www.xilinx.com
                                                                                             Chapter 12: Security


       BBRAM Programming

       The BBRAM key memory space is 288-bits. The BBRAM can be programmed by system
       software running on an RPU or APU processor, or via the PJTAG interface on MIO that
       connects to the Arm DAP controller and becomes an AXI bus master. The BBRAM block
       diagram is shown in Figure 12-3. The BBRAM and eFUSE programming details are described
       in the Programming BBRAM and eFUSEs Application Note (XAPP1319) [Ref 20].
       X-Ref Target - Figure 12-3




                                               APB




                                         BBRAM Control




                                        ws   addr               256-bit BBRAM Key
                                                                to CSU




                                          288-bit BBRAM



                                                                           X17981-092516



                                    Figure 12-3:    BBRAM Programming Interface
       BBRAM Readback Protections

       In previous generations of Xilinx devices, the AES key stored in battery-backed RAM (known
       as BBR) could be read out for validation. The BBR had a protocol mechanism in which the
       key was erased prior to being able to program and verify the key. Although these protocol
       protection mechanisms still exist, the readback path for the key has been removed. The
       Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC does not allow read back of the AES key in its BBRAM. Instead,
       when the key is written, a CRC32 value of that key is provided. After the key has been
       written, the device verifies that the key in storage matches the provided CRC32 value. The
       device then provides a pass or fail result.

       BBRAM Zeroization

       The AES key in BBRAM can be erased using an active write to 0's controlled by an internal
       zeroization signal. A status bit is provided to confirm that the key is all 0's.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                Send Feedback
                                                                                                             264
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                   www.xilinx.com
                                                                                  Chapter 12: Security


       BBRAM Key Agility

       The AES key in BBRAM can be securely updated from within the device while the device is
       in operation. Once the key is updated, subsequent boots of the device will use the new key.

       eFUSE
       The eFUSE array contains a block of 256 eFUSEs that can provide a key to the AES-256
       crypto engine. This block of eFUSEs has dedicated read and write disables controlled by
       additional eFUSEs. The eFUSE key can be stored in plain text form (red), obfuscated form
       (gray), or encrypted form (black).

       eFUSE Programming

       The eFUSEs can be programmed by system software running on an RPU or APU processor
       or via the PJTAG interface (on MIO) that connects to the Arm DAP controller and becomes
       an AXI bus master. In both cases, the eFUSE programming registers are accessed.

       The XilSKey macro library provides a convenient structure to program the eFUSEs. For
       details on eFUSE programming, see the Programming BBRAM and eFUSEs Application Note
       (XAPP1319) [Ref 20].

       eFUSE Readback Protections

       In previous generations of Xilinx devices, the key stored in the eFUSEs could be read out for
       validation. There were options to close the readback path by blowing additional eFUSEs.
       This readback path has been removed. The Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC does not allow read
       back. Instead, when the key is written, a CRC32 value of that key is provided. After the key
       has been written, the device verifies that the key in storage matches the provided CRC32.
       The device then provides a pass or fail result. The read disable eFUSE now prevents the
       CRC32 validation from occurring.

       eFUSE Zeroization

       Although the eFUSE key can by "oneized" by blowing all the eFUSEs from inside the device,
       it is unclear how much value this provides from a security point of view. Care must be taken
       to ensure that the key cannot be observed using a simple power analysis (SPA) attack
       during the blowing of the key bits. It is also possible for an adversary to manipulate external
       voltages and clocks to compromise successful eFUSE programming.

       Key Update Register
       The key update register is used during boot to support the key rolling feature, where the
       different AES key must be loaded multiple times. After boot, any key can be loaded into this
       register via APB by software running on the PS. A 256-bit KUP key is stored in the eight AES
       key update registers.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                    Send Feedback
                                                                                                   265
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018               www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                                    Chapter 12: Security


                             Operational Key
                             The OP key is a register that holds the (optional) key decrypted from the secure header of
                             the boot image. See Minimizing Use of the AES Boot Key (OP Key Option) for more details.

                             Storing Keys in Obfuscated Form (Gray)
                             As shown in Figure 12-4, the user key is encrypted with the family key, which is embedded
                             in the metal layers of the device. This family key is the same for all devices in the Zynq
                             UltraScale+ MPSoC family. The result is referred to as the obfuscated key. The term
                             obfuscated is used instead of encrypted to reflect the relative strength of the security
                             mechanism. The obfuscated key can reside in either the authenticated boot header or
                             eFUSEs. During boot, the CSU ROM takes the obfuscated key, decrypts it with the family key,
                             and then uses the resulting user key to decrypt the boot images.

                             The Xilinx development tools (bootgen) can be used to create a boot image with the
                             obfuscated key. The family key is not distributed with the Xilinx development tools. To
                             receive the family key, contact secure.solutions@xilinx.com. For more information on
                             generating boot images with the obfuscated key, see “Chapter 8: Security Features” in the
                             Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC Software Developer’s Guide (UG1137) [Ref 3].
X-Ref Target - Figure 12-4




                                                 Family Key
                                                                                                      Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC

                                                                   Obfuscated Key Load
                             Secret Red Key                                                      Obfuscated Key

                                                 AES-GCM



                                                                                            AES-GCM                     Family Key




                                                                                                 Secret Red Key
                                    Secret Red Key

                                                                                Encrypted
                                               Encrypted Image     Boot Media    Image
                 User                                                                                                    Unencrypted
                                                                     (SD or
                Image                                                                                                      Image
                                                                   Quad-SPI)
                                       AES-GCM                                                     AES-GCM


                                                                                                                                     X18021-031617



                                                                 Figure 12-4:   Obfuscated Key




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                                       Send Feedback
                                                                                                                                            266
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                                             www.xilinx.com
                                                                                  Chapter 12: Security


       Storing Keys in Encrypted Form (Black)
       The black key storage solution, as shown in Figure 12-5, uses a cryptographically strong
       KEK generated from a PUF to encrypt the user key. The resulting black key can then be
       stored either in eFUSEs or as part of the authenticated boot header resident in external
       memory. The black key storage provides the following advantages.

       •   The user key is the same for all devices. Consequently, the encrypted boot images are
           the same for all devices that use the same user key.
       •   The PUF KEK is unique for each device. Consequently, the black key stored with the
           device is unique for each device.
       •   The PUF KEK value is only known by the device (cannot be read by the user).

       The silicon manufacturing process includes inherent, random, and uncontrollable variations
       that cause unique and different characteristics from device to device. The Xilinx devices
       operate within these variations and device functionality is not affected. PUFs are tiny
       circuits that exploit these chip-unique variations to generate unique keys. The type of PUF
       used to generate the KEK is also an important consideration. The Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC
       PUF uses an asymmetric technology (i.e., a ring oscillator based type PUF licensed from
       Verayo), which is different from the device key storage technology (e.g., SRAM or eFUSE).
       This asymmetric technology increases the security level above what can be achieved with a
       single technology.

       IMPORTANT: PUF regeneration can only be performed when authentication is enabled. The PUF is
       disabled in the encrypt-only secure boot mode.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                    Send Feedback
                                                                                                  267
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                 www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                                   Chapter 12: Security

X-Ref Target - Figure 12-5




                                                                                                           FPGA/SoC


                              Secret “Red” Key                                                   Key Encoder




                                                                                                  Encrypted
                                                                                                                             PUF
                                                                                                 “Black” Key              Device Unique
                                                                                                 Device Unique




                                                                                                Key Decoder

                                     Secret “Red” Key
                                                                                               Secret “Red” Key
                                                                                                 during config
                                                                                                     Only
                                                        Encrypted               Encrypted                               Unencrypted
                                                        Bitstream/              Bitstream/                               Bitstream/
                                                          FSBL                    FSBL                                     FSBL
                      User                                            PROM
                     Design
                                        AES-GCM                                                   AES-GCM


                                                                                                                                  X18921-032117


                                                            Figure 12-5:   Black Key Storage




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                                      Send Feedback
                                                                                                                                          268
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                                         www.xilinx.com
                                                                                              Chapter 12: Security


       PUF Helper Data

       The PUF uses approximately 4 Kb of helper data to help the PUF recreate the original KEK
       value over the complete guaranteed operating temperature and voltage range over the life
       of the part. The helper data consists of a Syndrome value, an Aux value, and a Chash value
       (see Table 12-6). The helper data can either be stored in eFUSEs or in the boot image.

       Table 12-6:   PUF Helper Data
            Field            Size (Bits)                                Description
                                           These bits aid the PUF in recovering the proper PUF signature given
          Syndrome             4060        slight variations in the ring oscillators over temperature, voltage, and
                                           time
                                           This is a Hamming code that allows the PUF to perform some level of
             Aux                 24
                                           error correction on the PUF signature.
                                           This is a hash of the PUF signature that allows the PUF to recognize if
            Chash                32
                                           the regenerated signature is correct.

       PUF Operations

       Access to the PUF is restricted by the CSU. The CSU offers the PUF as a CSU service. The PUF
       can be accessed through the CSU registers. The CSU supports the user commands listed in
       Table 12-7.

       Table 12-7:   CSU User Commands
             Command                                               Description
            Registration         Create a new KEK and associated helper data (first time).
           Re-registration       Create a new KEK and associated new helper data.
                                 Encrypt/decrypt with the existing KEK and associated helper data (valid for
               Reuse
                                 eFUSE helper data only).




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                Send Feedback
                                                                                                                 269
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                     www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                                    Chapter 12: Security


                             Figure 12-6 shows a block diagram of how the PUF is connected inside the CSU.
X-Ref Target - Figure 12-6




                                      CSU                            CSU                                                 eFUSE
                                      AXIM                           APB                                                  APB




                                                                    CSU
                                                                  Registers


                                                                                           4K PUF syndrome data



                                                                                   dev_key_sel
                                                                     CSU
                                                               Private Registers

                                      CSU
                                   MicroBlaze
                                                                                     Key
                                                                     PUF                                 AES            eFUSE



                                                                                                                          X18925-080318



                                                Figure 12-6:   Block Diagram of PUF Connection in CSU

                             The PUF undergoes a registration process when a key is initially loaded into the device. The
                             registration process initializes the PUF so that a KEK is created. The registration software
                             can then use the KEK to encrypt the user key and program the eFUSEs. Alternatively, the
                             encrypted user key can be output for inclusion into a boot image. The registration software
                             also programs the helper data into the eFUSEs. Alternatively, the helper data can be output
                             for inclusion into a boot image. The helper data and the encrypted user key must be stored
                             in the same location (i.e., both in eFUSE or both in the boot image).

                             When the device powers on, the CSU bootROM examines the authenticated boot image
                             header. The boot image header contains information on whether the PUF is used, where the
                             encrypted key is stored (eFUSE or boot image), and where the helper data is stored (eFUSE
                             or boot image). The CSU then initializes the PUF, loads the helper data, and regenerates the
                             KEK. This process is called regeneration. Once the KEK is regenerated, the CSU bootROM
                             can use it to decrypt the user key, which is then used to decrypt the rest of the boot image.

                             In cases where the helper data and encrypted user key are stored in eFUSEs, the
                             regeneration process can be used by the user’s application software to regenerate the KEK.
                             This KEK can then be used to encrypt data, such as additional user keys, using the device
                             unique KEK. This encrypted user data can then be stored off-chip or in the user eFUSEs and
                             decrypted using the same process at a later time.

                             Note: When the PUF is used in this manner, it becomes the device key and the device key selection
                             cannot be changed back to the BBRAM or eFUSE key without a power on reset. The user can still
                             choose between the Key Update Register and the PUF (see Figure 12-2.)




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                                                       Send Feedback
                                                                                                                                          270
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                                         www.xilinx.com
                                                                                              Chapter 12: Security


        PUF Control eFUSEs

        The eFUSEs listed in Table 12-8 control additional PUF behaviors.

        Table 12-8:      PUF Control eFUSEs
               eFUSE Name                                   Description
                  REG_DIS         Disables registrations of the PUF.
               SYN_INVALID        Invalidates the helper data contained in the eFUSEs.
                                  Prevents modification of the helper data contained in the
                 SYN_LOCK
                                  eFUSEs.

        PUF Characterization, Testing, and Ordering

        The Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC PUF Characterization Report (RPT236) is a Xilinx proprietary
        document that covers additional characterization testing performed on the PUF. This
        characterization covers the PUF's stability (i.e., ability to accurately regenerate the KEK) over
        the voltage, temperature, and aging. It also covers characterization of the entropy, or
        security strength, of the KEK. Contact your local Xilinx FAE or sales person for details on how
        to obtain a copy of the report.

        Special ordering codes are required for devices where additional manufacturing tests have
        been performed on the PUF to help ensure entropy (i.e., key strength).

        Key Management Summary
        The device provides a variety of options for securing both boot images and user data. Boot
        image keys can be stored in BBRAM, eFUSE, or in the boot image itself. These keys can be
        in plain text (red), obfuscated with the family key (gray), or encrypted with the PUF KEK
        (black). These options are described in Table 12-9.

Table 12-9:     Boot Image Keys
              Features                    BBRAM                        eFUSE                    Boot Image
Programming method                Internal via software      Internal via software       Bootgen
                                  External via JTAG          External via JTAG           Bootgen + PUF
                                                             PUF registration software   Registration software


Program verification              CRC32 Only                 CRC32 Only                  N/A
Key state during storage          Red                        Red, black, or obfuscated   Black or obfuscated
In-use protections                Temporary storage in registers, not RAM.
                                  Transferred in parallel, not serial.
                                  Boot: DPA counter measures and zeroization after use.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                               Send Feedback
                                                                                                                 271
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018                     www.xilinx.com
                                                                                 Chapter 12: Security


       Protecting Test Interfaces
       JTAG Interface Protections
       On power-up, the default boot state is secure, and the JTAG interface only accepts a limited
       set of commands. These commands are listed here.

       •   IDCODE
       •   HIGHZ_I/O
       •   JTAG_STATUS
       •   PS_ERROR_STATUS
       •   BYPASS

       The device can boot up in secure and non-secure mode. A secure boot is one in which either
       authentication, encryption, or both encryption and authentication are used. All other boots
       are non-secure.

       Figure 12-7 shows the JTAG capabilities throughout the secure and non-secure boot
       process. For non-secure boots, once the boot is complete, either successfully or
       unsuccessfully, the full suite of JTAG commands are enabled.

       For secure boots, if the boot is completed successfully, the authenticated software is
       capable of enabling the additional JTAG commands. Otherwise, only the IDCODE, HIGHZ_IO,
       BYPASS, JTAG_STATUS, and PS_ERROR_STATUS commands are available. In the event of a
       failed secure boot, the JTAG capabilities are dependent on how the device was provisioned.

       •   Programming the SEC_LK eFUSE forces every failed secure boot to enter secure
           lockdown.
       •   In the event that SEC_LK is not programmed:

           °   User integration and test is supported via commanding authentication and
               encryption through the boot header. See Integration and Test Support (BH RSA
               Option) for more details. In the event of a failed secure boot, JTAG is enabled.

           °   For fielded systems, where authentication or encryption is forced upon every boot,
               the device enables the BSCAN capabilities only to support continuity testing. In this
               state, internal memory and registers are zeroized, and both the A53s and the R5s
               are held in reset.




Zynq UltraScale+ Device TRM                                                   Send Feedback
                                                                                                  272
UG1085 (v1.8) August 3, 2018               www.xilinx.com
                                                                                                                                                     Chapter 12: Security

X-Ref Target - Figure 12-7




                                                                                     PS RESET
                                                                                     (PORB = 0)




                                                                                     PS in Boot




                                                  Successful Boot      Failed Boot           Successful Secure   Failed Secure Boot
                                                   Non-Secure          Non-Secure                  Boot          Secure Lockdown




                                                                                                                      Disable
                                                                                             Authenticated SW       Reboot Fuse
                                                                                                                                      Yes           Secure Lockdown
                                                                                              enables JTAG?           Blown?
                                                                          Yes                                        (SEC_LK)

                         IDCODE, BYPASS, PS_ERROR_STATUS,
                              JTAG_STATUS, HIGHZ_IO
                                                                                                    No                   No


                                 IDCODE, BYPASS, STATUS
                                         EXTEST                       JTAG Enabled           JTAG not Enabled
                                                                                                                     AES or RSA
                                    PRELOAD/SAMPLE                                                                                            Yes
                                                                                                                    eFuse Blown?


                                IDCODE, BYPASS, STATUS
                                        EXTEST                                                                           No
                             PRELOAD/SAMPLE, DAP, PL Support

                                                                                                                    SOFT RESET           SOFT RESET




                                                                                                                     PS in Boot             PS in Boot




                                                                                                                      JTAG Boot         Enable BSCAN         Secure BSCAN
                                                                                                                  Full JTAG Access    Device Held in Reset       Mode



                                                                                                                                                                      X18920-052418



                                                                    Figure 12-7:          JTAG Interface Protections

                                In addition to disabling specific JTAG commands, specific JTAG sites are disabled by default
                                on power-on by software-controlled security gates. Triple redundancy is used to maintain
                                the state of these security gates. The location of these gates is shown in Figure 39-1 in
                                Chapter 39, System Test and Debug.
